---
layout: post
title: Why MAGA can't stand up to China
author: Ethan Izenwasser
---

*Make America Great Again*. On the surface, it honestly sounds kind of nice, albeit very populist. Who wouldn't want to make America the greatest country again? We're *obviously* losing so bad in recent times that it warrants a revisit of what used to make us so "Great" (can you hear the sarcasm dripping from the text?). I understand why certain groups of people latch onto this idea that of if we just looked at our past we could easily figure out why we aren't the singularly dominant geopolitical force we once were - while simultaneously happening to ignore everything that made us *not* so "Great" in the past. The politicians and policy makers of the 20th century seemed to know what they were doing, why can't we just go back to their ideas? Populist (and additionally nationalist) messaging has taken hold in America on both sides, from the Democrat's Progressive Wing pushing for complete recreations and reforms in social justice, healthcare, education, and just the middle class in general to the far right Republican's pushing to "drain the swamp", to break down the old establishment, to revitalize the middle class (see a pattern here?) as well as bringing back American jobs to American workers in the American heartland (which serves as probably Trump's largest base of supporters). These are the ideas behind MAGA: we've been treading on a dangerous path, and if we just had a politician, or maybe even an "outsider", stand up to the likes of China, we'd just be all hunky-dory again. However, I propose that this kind of reverence for the past cannot stand up to modern pressures, and will bring about the demise of American hegemony and the rise of China as the world's leading economy much faster than the pace we are on now.

## A Bit of History

In 1972, Nixon restarted diplomatic relations with China, and that included American companies and industry investing in joint-ventures, foreign companies, and multinational corporations in China. China, knowing it had a rising population, as well as Mao's interest in setting up economic development zones (which were basically just his way of introducing capitalist systems under China's Maoist one), had a goal of growing their economy. At the same time, America's middle class was booming, and many were starting to look for not only service jobs, but specifically non-manufacturing jobs (which had started to decline in the 60s due to a number of forces like increased productivity in the manufacturing field, while essentially stagnating productivity in the services sector, etc). Bachelor's degrees were on the rise, as were the number of people working trade jobs. Many companies wanted to look elsewhere for jobs, as this was also around the time that people were REALLY starting to get sick of the Cold War, and globalism was *just* starting to show its face in the world. Both of the situations in America and China were ripe for the economic development and investment in Chinese industry. 

Over the next few decades, manufacturing in the US kept decreasing, and China's exploded at an extraordinary rate. They built entire cities to rival the likes of Atlanta or Chicago in an incredibly short amount of time. Additionally, the Chinese stock market opened up, and foreign investments just kept rolling on in. The Chinese government started to drift away from their purely Maoist ideals, into a more socialist market economy, with both state owned and privately owned businesses competing and participating in the economy. Their GDP started to steadily rise, as did their trade relations with other countries and their trade output. Meanwhile, the US started the process of deregulation of a lot of New Deal policies, as well as moving away from Keyensian view of economics (which favored heavier government intervention to keep the highs and lows of the boom-bust cycle more in check, among other things) in favor of a more hands off approach to the economy, encapsulated eventually in trickle-down economics. This was the beginning of wealth accumulating at the top of the economic scale and the shrinking of the middle class in the US. There were also much steeper declines in manufacturing jobs and the rate at which manufacturing productivity was increasing in the US, all of which gave all the more reason to keep investing in China. 

At the same time, wages were starting to stagnate in the US, and debt was starting increase, all the while consumer spending and the stock market was increasing at an astonishing rate, and China was all too happy to bear the brunt of that manufacturing burden. They kept getting richer, and continuously reinvested that money back into both state-sponsored and private companies, as well as creating more and more of those economic development zones. They were now very quickly becoming one of the largest trade centers in the world, and with the fall of the Soviet Union, they were the biggest superpower in that part of the world. They just kept going and going. 

Both what was going on in the US (increased consumerism and stock market at the expense of rapidly ballooning debt and stagnating wages) and China (continuous rapid expansion with constant reinvestment into industrializing the country) continued throughout the late 80s and 90s. Manufacturing continued to fall in the US, but wasn't necessarily being replaced quite as fast by service jobs or the new fangled technology sector that was taking off. Manufacturing in China was seeing an increase in productivity as their GDP grew at around 8-10% annually, an astonishing rate. This was also the period of the dot-com boom, where technology companies really started to take hold and the Internet was essentially a Wild West for entrepreneurs to come in and make a boat load of money in a short bit. It looked like a great future for the spread of information and freedom in technology! That was, of course, until both the dot-com bust of 2000 and the stock market crash of 2008, which was a huge set back for America, but China bounced back from relatively quickly, allowing them to increase their trade output and increase their own foreign investments, the largest of which - the Belt and Road initiative - started in 2013. 

## MAGA and Today

"Ok," I can hear you saying, "what does that long diatribe have to do with MAGA? [Get on with it!](https://media1.tenor.com/images/173517d8f338257b9464c629b72e705b/tenor.gif)". In my opinion - and at this point it's all a guessing game because neither Trump nor any of his staff can clearly say what period of American "Greatness" they want to return to - Make America Great Again (in terms of economic policy) wants to return America to either a) that golden age of manufacturing just before US-China relations started up under Nixon that was propped up from America's industrial rise post-WWII or b) the stage of rising consumerism and stock market growth that was spurred on (if only for a short while) by deregulation and the move away from Keynesian economics. Both of these, in my opinion, are flawed concepts to want to return to. America is no longer, and probably never will be, a manufacturing focused country. It is just too economical to use cheaper labor overseas than pay workers in the US (an capitalism rarely likes to let go of a system once it's in place), and it also can't be fixed by imposing taxes or tariffs on products, as those all eventually get paid by the consumer, which lowers demand across the board and isn't particularly good for the middle class. We will never be the great industrial leader we once were, and accepting that fact and pivoting (like all great companies do, as the president likes to think of the country like a business) will bring about the economic prosperity that is at the heart of MAGA. Additionally, MAGA purports that the rise of China on the international field was due to weak leaders not standing up for the American people and making sure China stays in its place. In fact, it was just the opposite: it was the American *people* who wanted to buy the cheaper products at an exponentially growing rate, and to appease them the American politicians, companies, and China were all too happy to help give that to them.

I believe our best bet going forward is to primarily focus on technology and energy. Every country in the world is tackling Climate Change, and basically all of them are looking for cheaper forms of renewable or carbon-neutral energy. We are also currently in the midst of the technological revolution (or the Fourth Industrial Revolution, depending on who you ask). Our focus moving forward should be primarily on those two fields. And China seems to understand this. Their state sponsored and private telecom companies are amongst the largest in the world, and their infrastructure is starting to become more and more technology oriented (like their train system, or their rapidly expanding 5G network) with each passing year. They are also starting to really invest into Green Energy (even though their greenhouse gas emissions have been rising in recent years). They are looking to the future, they know they will overtake us in real GDP and GDP per capita relatively soon, and want to cement themselves as the world's leading economy. Focusing on bringing back manufacturing, or on "clean coal" or fossil fuels will not help stop that. In my opinion, it will make them win faster and at a much greater level. 
